README.md, before:

# Video Chat with AI

Local, GPU-accelerated application for real-time video conversation with a multimodal AI model.

## Table of Contents

- [Getting Started](#getting-started)
- [Goal](#goal)
- [Architecture Overview](#architecture-overview)
- [Use Cases](#use-cases)
- [Model](#model)
- [Resources](#resources)
- [Hardware](#hardware)
- [Development Approach](#development-approach)
- [Project Structure & Agents](#project-structure--agents)
- [Documentation](#documentation)

## Getting Started

```bash
git clone <your-repo-url>
cd video_chat

# Clone the reference repos (not included in this repo)
git clone https://github.com/OpenBMB/MiniCPM-o.git
git clone https://github.com/OpenBMB/MiniCPM-V-CookBook.git
```

These repos are used as reference material only -- see [Resources](#resources) for details.

## Goal

Stream live video from any source into **MiniCPM-o 4.5** and have a natural conversation about what it sees. Text chat first, voice interaction later.

## Architecture Overview

```
Video Source  --->  Model Server (MiniCPM-o 4.5)  --->  Web UI
(cam/stream/file)       (Python, local GPU)           (browser)
                              ^                           |
                              |     user questions        |
                              +---------------------------+
```

## Use Cases

- **Live video conversation** -- ask questions about what the AI sees in real-time
- **Monitoring & alerting** -- describe events, trigger alerts on conditions
- **Content logging** -- auto-generate text summaries of video content
- **Accessibility** -- rich scene descriptions for visually impaired users
- **Multi-model pipeline** -- feed vision output into other LLMs, alert systems, or video generators

## Model

**MiniCPM-o 4.5** -- omni-modal model (vision + audio + text), 9B parameters.

| Variant | VRAM | Notes |
|---------|------|-------|
| Full (BF16) | ~19 GB | Primary target for RTX 4090 |
| GGUF | ~10 GB | Fallback if VRAM constrained |
| AWQ | ~11 GB | Alternative quantized option |

## Resources

Built upon two cloned repositories:

| Repo | Contents |
|------|----------|
| `MiniCPM-o/` | Official model repo -- web demos, FastAPI server, Vue frontend, VAD |
| `MiniCPM-V-CookBook/` | Cookbook -- WebRTC demo, Omni Stream, Gradio, Docker setups, inference examples |

## Hardware

| Component | Spec |
|-----------|------|
| GPU (primary) | NVIDIA RTX 4090 24 GB |
| GPU (secondary) | NVIDIA RTX 5070 Ti 16 GB (~12 GB usable) -- backup only |
| CPU | AMD Ryzen 5800X3D |
| RAM | 64 GB DDR4 |
| OS | Ubuntu Desktop |
| Tools | Docker, npm, miniconda, uv |

The RTX 4090 is the primary compute target. The 5070 Ti is available but only considered if VRAM constraints require multi-GPU offloading (adds complexity due to mixed architectures).

## Development Approach

Proof of concept with iterative sprints. Start minimal, find limitations, improve. SOLID, DRY, KISS.

## Project Structure & Agents

See the [Project hierarchy](AI_INSTRUCTIONS.md#project-hierarchy) in AI_INSTRUCTIONS.md for what each folder and file is for, including the agent table and usage guidelines.

## Documentation

- [AI Instructions](AI_INSTRUCTIONS.md) -- project rules, hierarchy, agent table
- [Detailed Concept](concepts/concept.md) -- full concept with diagrams and technical details
- [Roadmap](roadmap.md) -- project roadmap
- [docs/](docs/) -- guides, tutorials, and reference documentation

Commit message:

Clarify vision, add model details, and create Sprint 1 plan
Sharpen concept and README to describe the continuous monitoring
loop pattern (sliding window, live steering, not video upload).
Add model variant comparison with links to HuggingFace and ModelScope.
Document BF16 as primary target, GGUF as fallback.
Add Sprint 1 implementation plan covering environment setup through
integration testing.

README.md, after:

# Video Chat with AI

Local, GPU-accelerated application for real-time video conversation with a multimodal AI model.

## Table of Contents

- [Getting Started](#getting-started)
- [Goal](#goal)
- [Architecture Overview](#architecture-overview)
- [Use Cases](#use-cases)
- [Model](#model)
- [Resources](#resources)
- [Hardware](#hardware)
- [Development Approach](#development-approach)
- [Project Structure & Agents](#project-structure--agents)
- [Documentation](#documentation)

## Getting Started

```bash
git clone <your-repo-url>
cd video_chat

# Clone the reference repos (not included in this repo)
git clone https://github.com/OpenBMB/MiniCPM-o.git
git clone https://github.com/OpenBMB/MiniCPM-V-CookBook.git
```

These repos are used as reference material only -- see [Resources](#resources) for details.

## Goal

Stream live video from any source into **MiniCPM-o 4.5** and have a real-time conversation about what it sees -- like a live commentator that watches along and responds to your directions.

The AI **continuously monitors** the video stream and narrates or answers based on a sliding window of recent frames. The user can steer the AI's focus at any time (e.g., "only tell me what the dog does"). This is not video upload + batch processing -- it's live, continuous, and steerable. Text chat first, voice interaction later.

## Architecture Overview

```
Video Source  --->  Model Server (MiniCPM-o 4.5)  --->  Web UI
(cam/stream/file)       (Python, local GPU)           (browser)
                              ^                           |
                              |     user questions        |
                              +---------------------------+
```

## Use Cases

- **Live video conversation** -- ask questions about what the AI sees in real-time
- **Monitoring & alerting** -- describe events, trigger alerts on conditions
- **Content logging** -- auto-generate text summaries of video content
- **Accessibility** -- rich scene descriptions for visually impaired users
- **Multi-model pipeline** -- feed vision output into other LLMs, alert systems, or video generators

## Model

**[MiniCPM-o 4.5](https://huggingface.co/openbmb/MiniCPM-o-4_5)** -- omni-modal model (vision + audio/STT + TTS), 9B parameters. Supports video understanding up to 10 FPS, speech recognition, text-to-speech, and full-duplex streaming -- all in one model.

| Variant | VRAM | Backend | Link |
|---------|------|---------|------|
| Full (BF16) | ~19 GB | Python / transformers | [HuggingFace](https://huggingface.co/openbmb/MiniCPM-o-4_5) / [ModelScope](https://modelscope.cn/models/OpenBMB/MiniCPM-o-4_5) |
| GGUF (quantized) | 4.8 - 16.4 GB | C++ / llama.cpp | [HuggingFace](https://huggingface.co/openbmb/MiniCPM-o-4_5-gguf) |

**Primary target:** Full BF16 on RTX 4090. **Fallback:** GGUF if VRAM constrained. See [concept](concepts/concept.md#model-selection) for detailed comparison.

## Resources

Built upon two cloned repositories:

| Repo | Contents |
|------|----------|
| `MiniCPM-o/` | Official model repo -- web demos, FastAPI server, Vue frontend, VAD |
| `MiniCPM-V-CookBook/` | Cookbook -- WebRTC demo, Omni Stream, Gradio, Docker setups, inference examples |

## Hardware

| Component | Spec |
|-----------|------|
| GPU (primary) | NVIDIA RTX 4090 24 GB |
| GPU (secondary) | NVIDIA RTX 5070 Ti 16 GB (~12 GB usable) -- backup only |
| CPU | AMD Ryzen 5800X3D |
| RAM | 64 GB DDR4 |
| OS | Ubuntu Desktop |
| Tools | Docker, npm, miniconda, uv |

The RTX 4090 is the primary compute target. The 5070 Ti is available but only considered if VRAM constraints require multi-GPU offloading (adds complexity due to mixed architectures).

## Development Approach

Proof of concept with iterative sprints. Start minimal, find limitations, improve. SOLID, DRY, KISS.

## Project Structure & Agents

See the [Project hierarchy](AI_INSTRUCTIONS.md#project-hierarchy) in AI_INSTRUCTIONS.md for what each folder and file is for, including the agent table and usage guidelines.

## Documentation

- [AI Instructions](AI_INSTRUCTIONS.md) -- project rules, hierarchy, agent table
- [Detailed Concept](concepts/concept.md) -- full concept with diagrams and technical details
- [Roadmap](roadmap.md) -- project roadmap
- [docs/](docs/) -- guides, tutorials, and reference documentation
